The next wave in the era of computing will be outside the realm
of the traditional desktop. In the Internet of Things (IoT) paradigm,
many of the objects that surround us will be on the network in one
form or another. Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID) and sensor
network technologies will rise to meet this new challenge, in which
information and communication systems are invisibly embedded
in the environment around us. This results in the generation of
enormous amounts of data which have to be stored, processed
and presented in a seamless, efficient, and easily interpretable
form. This model will consist of services that are commodities and
delivered in a manner similar to traditional commodities. Cloud
∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +61 3 83441344; fax: +61 3 93481184.
E-mail addresses: rbuyya@unimelb.edu.au, raj@cs.mu.oz.au (R. Buyya).
URL: http://www.buyya.com (R. Buyya).
computing can provide the virtual infrastructure for such utility
computing which integrates monitoring devices, storage devices,
analytics tools, visualization platforms and client delivery. The cost
based model that Cloud computing offers will enable end-to-end
service provisioning for businesses and users to access applications
on demand from anywhere.
Smart connectivity with existing networks and context-aware
computation using network resources is an indispensable part of
IoT. With the growing presence of WiFi and 4G-LTE wireless Internet
access, the evolution towards ubiquitous information and communication
networks is already evident. However, for the Internet
of Things vision to successfully emerge, the computing paradigm
will need to go beyond traditional mobile computing scenarios
that use smart phones and portables, and evolve into connecting
everyday existing objects and embedding intelligence into our
environment. For technology to disappear from the consciousness
of the user, the Internet of Things demands: (1) a shared
understanding of the situation of its users and their appliances,
0167-739X/$ – see front matter © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010
1646 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660
(2) software architectures and pervasive communication networks
to process and convey the contextual information to where it is relevant,
and (3) the analytics tools in the Internet of Things that aim
for autonomous and smart behavior. With these three fundamental
grounds in place, smart connectivity and context-aware computation
can be accomplished.
The term Internet of Things was first coined by Kevin Ashton
in 1999 in the context of supply chain management [1]. However,
in the past decade, the definition has been more inclusive covering
wide range of applications like healthcare, utilities, transport,
etc. [2]. Although the definition of ‘Things’ has changed as technology
evolved, the main goal of making a computer sense information
without the aid of human intervention remains the same.
A radical evolution of the current Internet into a Network of interconnected
objects that not only harvests information from the
environment (sensing) and interacts with the physical world (actuation/
command/control), but also uses existing Internet standards
to provide services for information transfer, analytics, applications,
and communications. Fueled by the prevalence of devices enabled
by open wireless technology such as Bluetooth, radio frequency
identification (RFID), Wi-Fi, and telephonic data services as well as
embedded sensor and actuator nodes, IoT has stepped out of its infancy
and is on the verge of transforming the current static Internet
into a fully integrated Future Internet [3]. The Internet revolution
led to the interconnection between people at an unprecedented
scale and pace. The next revolution will be the interconnection between
objects to create a smart environment. Only in 2011 did the
number of interconnected devices on the planet overtake the actual
number of people. Currently there are 9 billion interconnected
devices and it is expected to reach 24 billion devices by 2020.
According to the GSMA, this amounts to $1.3 trillion revenue opportunities
for mobile network operators alone spanning vertical
segments such as health, automotive, utilities and consumer electronics.
A schematic of the interconnection of objects is depicted in
Fig. 1, where the application domains are chosen based on the scale
of the impact of the data generated. The users span from individual
to national level organizations addressing wide ranging issues.
This paper presents the current trends in IoT research
propelled by applications and the need for convergence in several
interdisciplinary technologies. Specifically, in Section 2,wepresent
the overall IoT vision and the technologies that will achieve it
followed by some common definitions in the area along with
some trends and taxonomy of IoT in Section 3. We discuss several
application domains in IoT with a new approach in defining them
in Section 4 and Section 5 provides our Cloud centric IoT vision.
A case study of data analytics on the Aneka/Azure cloud platform
is given in Section 6 and we conclude with discussions on open
challenges and future trends in Section 7.
2. Ubiquitous computing in the next decade
The effort by researchers to create a human-to-human interface
through technology in the late 1980s resulted in the creation
of the ubiquitous computing discipline, whose objective is to embed
technology into the background of everyday life. Currently, we
are in the post-PC era where smart phones and other handheld devices
are changing our environment by making it more interactive
as well as informative. Mark Weiser, the forefather of Ubiquitous
Computing (ubicomp), defined a smart environment [4] as ‘‘the
physical world that is richly and invisibly interwoven with sensors,
actuators, displays, and computational elements, embedded seamlessly
in the everyday objects of our lives, and connected through
a continuous network’’.
The creation of the Internet has marked a foremost milestone
towards achieving ubicomp’s vision which enables individual
devices to communicate with any other device in the world. The
inter-networking reveals the potential of a seemingly endless
amount of distributed computing resources and storage owned by
various owners.
In contrast to Weiser’s Calm computing approach, Rogers
proposes a human centric ubicomp which makes use of human
creativity in exploiting the environment and extending their capabilities
[5]. He proposes a domain specific ubicomp solution when
he says—‘‘In terms of who should benefit, it is useful to think of
how ubicomp technologies can be developed not for the Sal’s of
the world, but for particular domains that can be set up and customized
by an individual firm or organization, such as for agricultural
production, environmental restoration or retailing’’.
Caceres and Friday [6] discuss the progress, opportunities
and challenges during the 20 year anniversary of ubicomp. They
discuss the building blocks of ubicomp and the characteristics of
the system to adapt to the changing world. More importantly,
they identify two critical technologies for growing the ubicomp
infrastructure—Cloud Computing and the Internet of Things.
The advancements and convergence of micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) technology, wireless communications, and
digital electronics has resulted in the development of miniature
devices having the ability to sense, compute, and communicate
wirelessly in short distances. These miniature devices called nodes
interconnect to form a wireless sensor networks (WSN) and find
wide ranging applications in environmental monitoring, infrastructure
monitoring, traffic monitoring, retail, etc. [7]. This has the
ability to provide a ubiquitous sensing capability which is critical
in realizing the overall vision of ubicomp as outlined by Weiser [4].
For the realization of a complete IoT vision, efficient, secure, scalable
and market oriented computing and storage resourcing is essential.
Cloud computing [6] is the most recent paradigm to emerge
which promises reliable services delivered through next generation
data centers that are based on virtualized storage technologies.
This platform acts as a receiver of data from the ubiquitous
sensors; as a computer to analyze and interpret the data; as well
as providing the user with easy to understand web based visualization.
The ubiquitous sensing and processing works in the background,
hidden from the user.
This novel integrated Sensor–Actuator–Internet framework
shall form the core technology around which a smart environment
will be shaped: information generated will be shared across diverse
platforms and applications, to develop a common operating
picture (COP) of an environment, where control of certain unrestricted
‘Things’ is made possible. As we move from www (static
pages web) to web2 (social networking web) to web3 (ubiquitous
computing web), the need for data-on-demand using sophisticated
intuitive queries increases. To take full advantage of the available
Internet technology, there is a need to deploy large-scale, platformindependent,
wireless sensor network infrastructure that includes
data management and processing, actuation and analytics. Cloud
computing promises high reliability, scalability and autonomy to
provide ubiquitous access, dynamic resource discovery and composability
required for the next generation Internet of Things applications.
Consumers will be able to choose the service level by
changing the Quality of Service parameters.
3. Definitions, trends and elements
3.1. Definitions
As identified by Atzori et al. [8], Internet of Things can be realized
in three paradigms—internet-oriented (middleware), things
oriented (sensors) and semantic-oriented (knowledge). Although
this type of delineation is required due to the interdisciplinary nature
of the subject, the usefulness of IoT can be unleashed only in
an application domain where the three paradigms intersect.
The RFID group defines the Internet of Things as –
J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660 1647
Fig. 1. Internet of Things schematic showing the end users and application areas based on data.
• The worldwide network of interconnected objects uniquely
addressable based on standard communication protocols.
According to Cluster of European research projects on the Internet
of Things [2] –
• ‘Things’ are active participants in business, information and
social processes where they are enabled to interact and communicate
among themselves and with the environment by exchanging
data and information sensed about the environment,
while reacting autonomously to the real/physical world events
and influencing it by running processes that trigger actions and
create services with or without direct human intervention.
According to Forrester [9], a smart environment –
• Uses information and communications technologies to make
the critical infrastructure components and services of a
city’s administration, education, healthcare, public safety, real
estate, transportation and utilities more aware, interactive and
efficient.
In our definition, we make the definition more user centric and do
not restrict it to any standard communication protocol. This will
allow long-lasting applications to be developed and deployed using
the available state-of-the-art protocols at any given point in time.
Our definition of the Internet of Things for smart environments is
–
• Interconnection of sensing and actuating devices providing the
ability to share information across platforms through a unified
framework, developing a common operating picture for
enabling innovative applications. This is achieved by seamless
ubiquitous sensing, data analytics and information representation
with Cloud computing as the unifying framework.
3.2. Trends
Internet of Things has been identified as one of the emerging
technologies in IT as noted in Gartner’s IT Hype Cycle (see Fig. 2).
A Hype Cycle [10] is a way to represent the emergence, adoption,
maturity, and impact on applications of specific technologies. It has
been forecasted that IoT will take 5–10 years for market adoption.
The popularity of different paradigms varies with time. The web
search popularity, as measured by the Google search trends during
the last 10 years for the terms Internet of Things, Wireless Sensor
Networks and Ubiquitous Computing are shown in Fig. 3 [11]. As
it can be seen, since IoT has come into existence, search volume is
consistently increasing with the falling trend for Wireless Sensor
Networks. As per Google’s search forecast (dotted line in Fig. 3), this
trend is likely to continue as other enabling technologies converge
to form a genuine Internet of Things.
3.3. IoT elements
We present a taxonomy that will aid in defining the components
required for the Internet of Things from a high level perspective.
Specific taxonomies of each component can be found
elsewhere [12–14]. There are three IoT components which enables
seamless ubicomp: (a) Hardware—made up of sensors, actuators
and embedded communication hardware (b) Middleware—on demand
storage and computing tools for data analytics and (c)
Presentation—novel easy to understand visualization and interpretation
tools which can be widely accessed on different platforms
and which can be designed for different applications. In this section,
we discuss a few enabling technologies in these categories
which will make up the three components stated above.
1648 J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660
Fig. 2. Gartner 2012 Hype Cycle of emerging technologies.
Source: Gartner Inc. [10].
Fig. 3. Google search trends since 2004 for terms Internet of Things, Wireless Sensor Networks, Ubiquitous Computing.
3.3.1. Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
RFID technology is a major breakthrough in the embedded communication
paradigm which enables design of microchips for wireless
data communication. They help in the automatic identification
of anything they are attached to acting as an electronic barcode
[15,16]. The passive RFID tags are not battery powered and they use
the power of the reader’s interrogation signal to communicate the
ID to the RFID reader. This has resulted in many applications particularly
in retail and supply chain management. The applications
can be found in transportation (replacement of tickets, registration
stickers) and access control applications as well. The passive
tags are currently being used in many bank cards and road toll tags
which are among the first global deployments. Active RFID readers
have their own battery supply and can instantiate the communication.
Of the several applications, the main application of active
RFID tags is in port containers [16] for monitoring cargo.
3.3.2. Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN)
Recent technological advances in low power integrated circuits
and wireless communications have made available efficient, low
cost, low power miniature devices for use in remote sensing applications.
The combination of these factors has improved the viability
of utilizing a sensor network consisting of a large number
of intelligent sensors, enabling the collection, processing, analysis
and dissemination of valuable information, gathered in a variety
of environments [7]. Active RFID is nearly the same as the lower
endWSNnodes with limited processing capability and storage. The
scientific challenges that must be overcome in order to realize the
enormous potential of WSNs are substantial and multidisciplinary
in nature [7]. Sensor data are shared among sensor nodes and sent
to a distributed or centralized system for analytics. The components
that make up the WSN monitoring network include:
(a) WSN hardware—Typically a node (WSN core hardware) contains
sensor interfaces, processing units, transceiver units and
power supply. Almost always, they comprise of multiple A/D
converters for sensor interfacing and more modern sensor
nodes have the ability to communicate using one frequency
band making them more versatile [7].
(b) WSN communication stack—The nodes are expected to be deployed
in an ad-hoc manner for most applications. Designing
J. Gubbi et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 29 (2013) 1645–1660 1649
an appropriate topology, routing and MAC layer is critical for
the scalability and longevity of the deployed network. Nodes
in a WSN need to communicate among themselves to transmit
data in single or multi-hop to a base station. Node drop outs,
and consequent degraded network lifetimes, are frequent. The
communication stack at the sink node should be able to interact
with the outside world through the Internet to act as a gateway
to the WSN subnet and the Internet [17].
(c) WSN Middleware—A mechanism to combine cyber infrastructure
with a Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) and sensor networks
to provide access to heterogeneous sensor resources in
a deployment independent manner [17]. This is based on the
idea of isolating resources that can be used by several applications.
A platform-independent middleware for developing
sensor applications is required, such as an Open Sensor Web
Architecture (OSWA) [18]. OSWA is built upon a uniform set of
operations and standard data representations as defined in the
SensorWebEnablement Method (SWE) by the Open Geospatial
Consortium (OGC).
(d) Secure Data aggregation—An efficient and secure data aggregation
method is required for extending the lifetime of the
network as well as ensuring reliable data collected from sensors
[18]. Node failures are a common characteristic of WSNs,
the network topology should have the capability to heal itself.
Ensuring security is critical as the system is automatically
linked to actuators and protecting the systems from intruders
becomes very important.
3.3.3. Addressing schemes
The ability to uniquely identify ‘Things’ is critical for the success
of IoT. This will not only allow us to uniquely identify billions of
devices but also to control remote devices through the Internet.
The few most critical features of creating a unique address are:
uniqueness, reliability, persistence and scalability.
Every element that is already connected and those that are going
to be connected, must be identified by their unique identification,
location and functionalities. The current IPv4 may support to
an extent where a group of cohabiting sensor devices can be identified
geographically, but not individually. The Internet Mobility attributes
in the IPV6 may alleviate some of the device identification
problems; however, the heterogeneous nature of wireless nodes,
variable data types, concurrent operations and confluence of data
from devices exacerbates the problem further [19].
Persistent network functioning to channel the data traffic
ubiquitously and relentlessly is another aspect of IoT. Although,
the TCP/IP takes care of this mechanism by routing in a more
reliable and efficient way, from source to destination, the IoT faces
a bottleneck at the interface between the gateway and wireless
sensor devices. Furthermore, the scalability of the device address of
the existing network must be sustainable. The addition of networks
and devices must not hamper the performance of the network,
the functioning of the devices, the reliability of the data over the
network or the effective use of the devices from the user interface.
To address these issues, the Uniform Resource Name (URN) system
is considered fundamental for the development of IoT. URN
creates replicas of the resources that can be accessed through the
URL. With large amounts of spatial data being gathered, it is often
quite important to take advantage of the benefits of metadata
for transferring the information from a database to the user via
the Internet [20]. IPv6 also gives a very good option to access the
resources uniquely and remotely. Another critical development in
addressing is the development of a lightweight IPv6 that will enable
addressing home appliances uniquely.
Wireless sensor networks (considering them as building blocks
of IoT), which run on a different stack compared to the Internet,
cannot possess IPv6 stack to address individually and hence a
subnet with a gateway having a URN will be required. With this
in mind, we then need a layer for addressing sensor devices by
the relevant gateway. At the subnet level, the URN for the sensor
devices could be the unique IDs rather than human-friendly names
as in the www, and a lookup table at the gateway to address this
device. Further, at the node level each sensor will have a URN (as
numbers) for sensors to be addressed by the gateway. The entire
network now forms a web of connectivity from users (high-level)
to sensors (low-level) that is addressable (through URN), accessible
(through URL) and controllable (through URC).
3.3.4. Data storage and analytics
One of the most important outcomes of this emerging field is
the creation of an unprecedented amount of data. Storage, ownership
and expiry of the data become critical issues. The internet consumes
up to 5% of the total energy generated today and with these
types of demands, it is sure to go up even further. Hence, data centers
that run on harvested energy and are centralized will ensure
energy efficiency as well as reliability. The data have to be stored
and used intelligently for smart monitoring and actuation. It is important
to develop artificial intelligence algorithms which could be
centralized or distributed based on the need. Novel fusion algorithms
need to be developed to make sense of the data collected.
State-of-the-art non-linear, temporal machine learning methods
based on evolutionary algorithms, genetic algorithms, neural networks,
and other artificial intelligence techniques are necessary to
achieve automated decision making. These systems show characteristics
such as interoperability, integration and adaptive communications.
They also have a modular architecture both in terms of
hardware system design as well as software development and are
usually very well-suited for IoT applications. More importantly, a
centralized infrastructure to support storage and analytics is required.
This forms the IoT middleware layer and there are numerous
challenges involved which are discussed in future sections. As
of 2012, Cloud based storage solutions are becoming increasingly
popular and in the years ahead, Cloud based analytics and visualization
platforms are foreseen.
3.3.5. Visualization
Visualization is critical for an IoT application as this allows the
interaction of the userwith the environment. With recent advances
in touch screen technologies, use of smart tablets and phones has
become very intuitive. For a lay person to fully benefit from the IoT
revolution, attractive and easy to understand visualization has to
be created. As we move from 2D to 3D screens, more information
can be provided in meaningful ways for consumers. This will also
enable policy makers to convert data into knowledge, which is critical
in fast decision making. Extraction of meaningful information
from raw data is non-trivial. This encompasses both event detection
and visualization of the associated raw and modeled data, with
information represented according to the needs of the end-user.